Remove Tailwind Module (#528)
ocaml/v3.ocaml.org: data/tutorials/gs_00_up_and_running.md

# Get Up and Running With OCaml

> This page will walk you through the installation of everything you need to have a comfortable development environment to write OCaml code on a new project. This includes of course [installing the compiler](#installing-ocaml) itself, but also a build system, a package manager, an LSP server to support your editor, and a few other tools that we describe [later](#setting-up-development-tools), setting up [editor support](#configuring-your-editor) and bootstrapping a [new project](#starting-a-new-project).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page will walk you through the installation of everything you need for a comfortable development environment to write projects in OCaml code. Of course this includes [installing the compiler](#installing-ocaml) itself, but it also installs a build system, a package manager, an LSP server to support your editor, and a few other tools that we describe [later](#setting-up-development-tools), setting up [editor support](#configuring-your-editor), and bootstrapping a [new project](#starting-a-new-project).
```

If you are willing to set up OCaml on Windows, you might be interested in
reading [OCaml on Windows](/docs/ocaml-on-windows) first.
The following instructions work on Linux, BSD and macOS but also on Cygwin and

> WSL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following instructions work on Linux, BSD, and macOS. Plus, they also work on Cygwin and
WSL.
```

## Installing OCaml

The **platform installer** is currently in active development. It will

> automatically install Opam, OCaml and the development tools. [See below](#up-and-running-with-the-platform-installer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automatically install opam, OCaml, and the development tools. [See below](#up-and-running-with-the-platform-installer)
```

Thomas has asserted he wants opam spelled in all lowercase as its official name.

for the instruction.

> Please note that the installer is work in progress and might not work on your system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please note that the installer is a work in progress and might not work on your system.
```

> OCaml is available as a package in most linux distributions, however, it is
> often outdated. On the contrary, OCaml's package manager `opam` allows to
> easily switch from one version of OCaml to the other and much more. This is
> especially useful since different projects might require different versions of
> OCaml.
> 
> So the best way to install `ocaml` is in fact by using `opam`, OCaml's package manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OCaml is available as a package in most Linux distributions; however, it is
often outdated. On the contrary, OCaml's package manager opam allows you to
easily switch between OCaml versions and much more. This is
especially useful since different projects might require different versions of
OCaml.

So the best way to install OCaml is in fact by using opam, OCaml's official package manager.
```

I added "official" in the last sentence to emphasise the preference to use opam. Otherwise, it sounds repetitive since we just said it was OCaml's package manager above. If you don't like the "official," I suggest changing this sentence and combining it with the last to read: 

"This is especially useful since different projects might require different versions of OCaml, so the best way to install OCaml is in fact by using opam."

> ### Installing `opam`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Installing opam
```

> Alternatively, you can use the alpha-version platform installer to install Opam and the development tools, [see below](#up-and-running-with-the-platform-installer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can use the alpha-version platform installer to install opam and the development tools, [see below](#up-and-running-with-the-platform-installer).
```

> [Opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/) is the package manager of OCaml. It introduces the concept of "switches", consisting of a compiler together with a set of packages (libraries and other files). Switches are used to have independent sets of dependencies in different projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/) is the package manager of OCaml. It introduces the concept of "switches," consisting of a compiler together with a set of packages (libraries and other files). Switches are used to have independent sets of dependencies in different projects.
```

> After having installed `opam`, you will need to initialise it, [see below](#initialize-opam).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After having installed opam, you will need to initialise it, [see below](#initialize-opam).
```

> To install `opam`, you can [use your system package manager](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html#Using-your-distribution-39-s-package-system), or download the [binary distribution](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html#Binary-distribution). The details are available in the above links, but for convenience, we copy a few of them here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install opam, you can [use your system package manager](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html#Using-your-distribution-39-s-package-system), or download the [binary distribution](https://opam.ocaml.org/doc/Install.html#Binary-distribution). The details are available in the above links, but for convenience, we copy a few of them here:
```

I'd personally prefer to either capitalise opam or wrap it in monospace, but Thomas decided the formatting for lower case, no monospace as the official name. We're only using monospace when talking about the command `opam`

**For macOS**

``` shell
# With Homebrew:
brew install opam

# With MacPort:
port install opam
```

**For Linux**

``` shell
# Ubuntu
add-apt-repository ppa:avsm/ppa
apt update
apt install opam

# Archlinux
pacman -S opam

# Debian (stable, testing and unstable)
apt-get install opam
```

**Binary distribution**

``` shell
bash -c "sh <(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ocaml/opam/master/shell/install.sh)"
```

### Initialising `opam`

This step is done automatically by the alpha-version platform installer, [see below](#up-and-running-with-the-platform-installer).

> If you have installed the binary distribution of `opam` through the install script, this step should already be done. If you have installed it through your system package manager, you must initialise `opam` by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have installed the binary distribution of opam through the install script, this step should already be done. If you have installed it through your system package manager, you must initialise opam by running the following command:
```

```
opam init          # Can take some time
eval $(opam env)
```

> The first command (`opam init`) creates a first switch, usually called `default`, although this is just a convention. If you have installed `ocaml` through your system package manager, the first switch will be set up to use this compiler (it is called a "system switch"). Otherwise, it will build one from source, usually taking the most recent version of `ocaml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first command (`opam init`) creates a first switch, usually called `default`, although this is just a convention. If you have installed OCaml through your system package manager, the first switch will be set up to use this compiler (it is called a "system switch"). Otherwise, it will build one from source, usually taking the most recent version of OCaml.
```

> The second command (`eval $(opam env)`) modifies a few environments variables to make the shell aware of the switch you are using. For instance, it will add what is needed to the `PATH` variable so that typing `ocaml` in the shell runs the ocaml binary of the current switch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second command (`eval $(opam env)`) modifies a few environments variables to make the shell aware of the switch you are using. For instance, it will add what is needed to the `PATH` variable so that typing `ocaml` in the shell runs the OCaml binary of the current switch.
```

> In case you are not satisfied with the `ocaml` version of your system switch, you can write the following commands to create a new switch with a recent version of ocaml:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case you are not satisfied with the OCaml version of your system switch, you can write the following commands to create a new switch with a recent version of OCaml:
```

> ``` shell

Reviewer 2: We need to remove the space between the ticks and the language tag to pass the test... (you can cherry pick https://github.com/panglesd/v3.ocaml.org-server/commit/fa159f2dfcb13352937d9d974667a330dd3f7357, I don't have the right to push it!)

Reviewer 3: :cherries:

opam switch create 4.14.0
eval $(opam env)
```

More information can be found on the [official website](https://opam.ocaml.org/).

> ### The OCaml base tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The OCaml Base Tools
```

> OCaml is installed in an Opam switch, which, among others, bring the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OCaml is installed in an opam switch, which, among others, bring the following
```

programs:

> - A "toplevel", which can be called with the `ocaml` command. It consists of a read-eval-print loop (a [REPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read%E2%80%93eval%E2%80%93print_loop)), similar to the `python` or `node` command, and can be handy to quickly try the language. The user interface of `ocaml` is very basic but is improved a lot in one of the package that we will install later: `utop`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A "toplevel," which can be called with the `ocaml` command. It consists of a read-eval-print loop (a [REPL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read%E2%80%93eval%E2%80%93print_loop)), similar to the `python` or `node` command, and can be handy to quickly try the language. The user interface of OCaml is very basic but is improved a lot in one of the package that we will install later: UTop.
```

- A compiler to **native code**, called `ocamlopt`. It creates executables that can be executed directly on your system.

- A compiler to **bytecode**, called `ocamlc`. It creates executables that can be interpreted by a variety of runtime environments, making it more flexible.

> Although it is theoretically all we need to write OCaml code, it is not at all a complete and comfortable development environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although this is theoretically all we need to write OCaml code, it is not at all a complete and comfortable development environment.
```

> ## Setting up development tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setting Up Development Tools
```

This step is done automatically by the alpha-version platform installer, [see below](#up-and-running-with-the-platform-installer).

> We will now install everything we need to get a complete development environment, which includes:

Reviewer: If you'd like the following list to remain all in monospace to indicate they're the commands needed to install each, rather than the proper name of each, I suggest a revision of the sentence indicating these are the commands, or perhaps just adding the command at the end, like:

- Dune, a fast and full-feature build system for OCaml. Install with `opam install dune`.

Although frankly I don't think these are necessary. This way the list introduces the tools themselves and the code example beneath shows the command to install each, so it's clear there that the commands are all lowercase, as most are.

> - `dune`, a fast and full-featured build system for OCaml,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Dune, a fast and full-featured build system for OCaml
```

> - `merlin` (the backend) and `ocaml-lsp-server` to provide editors with many useful features such as "jump to definition",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Merlin (the backend) and `ocaml-lsp-server` to provide editors with many useful features such as "jump to definition"
```

> - `odoc` to generate documentation from OCaml code,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `odoc` to generate documentation from OCaml code
```

`odoc` remains in monospace because Jon decided that was how to format the official name. Other proper names are capitalised unless the creator/maintainer has decided on another format.

> - `ocamlformat` to automatically format OCaml code,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- OCamlformat to automatically format OCaml code
```

> - `utop`, an improved REPL,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- UTop, an improved REPL,
```

> - `dune-release` to release code to `opam-repository`, the package base for `opam`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dune-release` to release code to `opam-repository`, the package base for opam.
```

> All these tools can be installed in your current switch (remember that `opam` groups installed packages in independant switches) using the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All these tools can be installed in your current switch (remember that opam groups installed packages in independent switches) using the following command:
```

``` shell
opam install dune merlin ocaml-lsp-server odoc ocamlformat utop dune-release
```

> Now that the tools are installed, it remains to understand how to use them. Most of them will be driven either by the editor or by `dune`, but `utop` is handy to try OCaml or a specific library.

Reviewer: It reads like `dune` and `utop` in this case are talking about the commands to use these tools, so keeping them in monospace works here. If I'm mistaken, and this is referring to the tool as a whole rather than the command, it's best to format them like Dune and UTop to visually differentiate between the tool/package/program and the command.

> ## Up and Running with the platform installer

Reviewer 4: I like that we keep the two workflows in the documentation, but I would invert the two: at the moment getting Up and Running with the installer is the alternative, I would make Platform installer workflow the default.

I would also remove the disclaimers that it's an early version and still in development: the PR won't be merged before the first stable version anyways, at which point, this will become the recommended way to install OCaml and the Platform.

Reviewer 3: I added a commit to move this section to the top. The page is very long so I kept a link from the "Setting Up Development Tools" sub section, in case someone scrolled that far and lost context.

> won't be merged before the first stable version anyways

I think this PR should be merged before OCaml 5.0 because we planned to have an alpha version of the installer at this time but that doesn't make it magically stable.
The warning is useful because the installer will not work for some people, the main reason being that it's not present in any package manager at the moment, also bugs. This warning adds a fallback to the old instructions, which are still supported and stable.

> ## Up and Running with the platform installer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Up and Running with the Platform Installer
```

> The platform installer is work in progress, you can follow its development and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The platform installer is work in progress. You can follow its development and
```

report issues on [the repository](https://github.com/tarides/ocaml-platform-installer/).

Please note that the installer might not work on your system. If that's the
case, follow the old instructions above, which are still relevant.

> The installer is not in any package manager yet but it can be installed using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The installer is not in any package manager yet, but it can be installed using
```

> this script, this will install both `opam` and `ocaml-platform`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this script, which will install both opam and OCaml Platform`:
```
capitalised as it is in the repo: https://github.com/tarides/ocaml-platform-installer#whats-under-the-hood=

```shell
sudo bash < <(curl -sL https://github.com/tarides/ocaml-platform-installer/releases/latest/download/installer.sh)
```

> This downloads a script from the web and executes it as root, you are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This downloads a script from the web and executes it as root. You are
```

encouraged to have a look at what it does first.

Once this step is done, setup the environment with:

```shell
ocaml-platform
```

> This will initialize Opam and install the development tools, which might take

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will initialise opam and install the development tools, which might take
```

some time.

> The tools are not installed exactly the same way as with `opam install`: they
> are built in a sandbox so that each tool's dependencies are not installed in
> the same space as your project's dependencies, see [Under the hood](https://github.com/tarides/ocaml-platform-installer#whats-under-the-hood=)
> for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tools are not installed exactly the same way as with `opam install`. They
are built in a sandbox so that each tool's dependencies are not installed in
the same space as your project's dependencies, see [Under the Hood](https://github.com/tarides/ocaml-platform-installer#whats-under-the-hood=)
for more information.
```

> `ocaml-platform` can be run again at any time, to install the tools in an other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ocaml-platform` can be run again at any time to install the tools in another
```

> Opam switch for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
opam switch for example.
```

> ## Using the OCaml toplevel with `utop`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using the OCaml Toplevel with UTop
```

> `utop` is a nice toplevel for OCaml. It features history, line edition, and the ability to load a package that you have installed in your switch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
UTop is a nice toplevel for OCaml. It features history, line edition, and the ability to load a package installed in your switch.
```

$
```

> ## Configuring your editor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Configuring Your Editor
```

> While a toplevel is great for interactively trying out the language, we will shortly need to write ocaml files in an editor. We already installed the tools needed to have an editor suppor: `merlin`, providing all features such as "jump to definition" or "show type", and `ocaml-lsp-server`, a server exposing those features to the editor through the [language server protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language_Server_Protocol).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While a toplevel is great for interactively trying out the language, we will shortly need to write OCaml files in an editor. We already installed the tools needed to have editor support: Merlin, providing all features such as "jump to definition" or "show type", and `ocaml-lsp-server`, a server exposing those features to the editor through the [language server protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Language_Server_Protocol).
```

> OCaml has plugins for many editors, but the most actively maintained are for Visual Studio Code, Emacs and Vim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OCaml has plugins for many editors, but the most actively maintained are for Visual Studio Code, Emacs, and Vim.
```

For **Visual Studio Code**, we install the [OCaml Platform Visual Studio Code extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ocamllabs.ocaml-platform) from the Visual
Studio Marketplace.

Upon first loading an OCaml source file, you may be prompted to select the

> toolchain in use: pick the version of OCaml you are using, e.g. 4.11.1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
toolchain in use: pick the version of OCaml you are using, e.g., 4.11.1
```

from the list. Now, help is available by hovering over symbols in your program:

![Visual Studio Code](/media/tutorials/vscode.png)

> **For Vim and Emacs** we won't use the LSP server, but rather directly talk to `merlin` that we installed earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**For Vim and Emacs** we won't use the LSP server, but rather directly talk to Merlin, which we installed earlier.
```

> When installing `merlin`, instructions were printed on how to link Merlin with your editor. If you do not have them visible, the short way is just to run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When installing Merlin, instructions were printed on how to link Merlin with your editor. If you do not have them visible, the short way is just to run:
```

```shell
opam user-setup install
```

> ## Starting a new project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Starting a New Project
```

> We explain here all what is needed to start a project using the tools that we installed. The build system `dune` allows us to initialize a project, containg a `helloworld` example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We explain here all that's needed to start a project using the tools that we installed. The build system, Dune, allows us to initialise a project, containing a `helloworld` example:
```

```shell
dune init project helloworld
cd helloworld
```

> All the metadata of your project are available in the file `dune-project`. Edit it to match your specific project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the metadata of your project is available in the file `dune-project`. Edit it to match your specific project.
```

We can build our program with `dune build`:

```shell
dune build
```

When we change our program, we can type `dune build` again to make a new
executable. To run the program, we can use:

```shell
dune exec ./bin/main.exe
```

Which will print:

```
Hello, World!
```

Or, alternatively,

```shell
dune exec helloworld
```

> All the build outputs generated by dune go in the `_build` directory. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the build outputs generated by Dune go in the `_build` directory. The
```

`main.exe` executable is generated inside the `_build/default/bin/`
subdirectory.

> The source code for the program is found in `./bin/main.ml` and any supporting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The source code for the program is found in `./bin/main.ml`, and any supporting
```

library code should go in `lib`.

To learn more about Dune, see the [official
documentation](https://dune.readthedocs.io/en/stable/).

> ### `ocamlformat` for automatic formatting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### OCamlformat for Automatic Formatting
```

> Automatic formatting with `ocamlformat` is usually already supported by the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automatic formatting with OCamlformat is usually already supported by the
```

> editor plugin but it requires a configuration file at the root of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
editor plugin, but it requires a configuration file at the root of the project.
```

> Moreover, since different versions of `ocamlformat` will vary in formatting, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, since different versions of OCamlformat will vary in formatting, it
```

is good practice to enforce the one you are using. Doing:

```shell
echo "version = 0.22.4" > .ocamlformat
```

> will enforce that only `ocamlformat` version `0.22.4` can format the files of the project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will enforce that only OCamlformat version 0.22.4 can format the files of the project.
```

Note that a `.ocamlformat` file is _needed_, but an empty file is accepted.

> In addition to the editor, `dune` is also able to drive `ocamlformat`. Running

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the editor, Dune is also able to drive OCamlformat. Running
```

this command will automatically format all files from your codebase:

```shell
dune fmt
```

> ### `odoc` for documentation generation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### `odoc` for Documentation Generation
```

`odoc` is a tool that is not meant to be used by hand, just as compilers are

> not meant to be run by hand in complex projects. `dune` can drive `odoc` to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not meant to be run by hand in complex projects. Dune can drive `odoc` to
```
